23-200-0105A
Basic Mechanical Engineering
Module 3
Machine Tools

Syllabus
Introduction: Role of Mechanical Engineering in Industries and Society...
Introduction to power consuming devices: Refrigerator, types and properties of refrigerants...
Module II
Introduction to power transmission systems: Belts, chain, and Gear drives...
Module III
Introduction to engineering materials: composite and smart materials.
Joining Processes: Soldering, Brazing and Welding, Definitions, classification of welding process, Arc welding, Gas welding and types of flames.
Machine Tool Operations: Working Principle of lathe, Lathe operations: Turning, facing, knurling. Working principles of Drilling Machine, drilling operations: drilling, boring, reaming. Working of Milling Machine, Milling operations: plane milling and slot milling.
Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Systems: Introduction, components of CNC...

Machine Tool Operations
A machine, which performs the material removal operations with tools, to produce desired shape and size of the work-piece is known as machine tool.
Types of Machine Tools:
1. Lathe
2. Shaping machine
3. Drilling machine
4. Milling machine
5. Grinding machine
6. Slotting machine
7. Planer machine

Tools used:
- Single Point Cutting Tool: One cutting edge (used in lathe)
- Multipoint Cutting Tool: Number of teeth or cutting edges on the periphery

LATHE
It is a general purpose machine tool, which removes excess material from the work piece, in the form of chips, by rotating the work piece against a single point cutting tool.

Working Principle:
- Hold the work piece and rotate it about an axis.
- Cutting tool is fed either parallel or perpendicular to the axis of the work piece.
- Tool moved parallel to axis gives cylindrical surface.
- Tool moved perpendicular to axis gives a flat surface.

Components of Lathe:
1. Bed
2. Headstock
3. Tailstock
4. Carriage
5. Lathe centre
6. Feed mechanism

1. Bed: Base foundation of the lathe, provides strength & rigidity. Material - Cast Iron.
2. Headstock: Permanently mounted on the bed at the left end. Spindle is a hollow cylindrical shaft supported by bearings. Spindle is driven by a motor.
3. Tailstock: Mounted on the bed at the right end and can be clamped at any convenient position. Supports one end of the work piece and used for holding tools for drilling/reaming.
4. Carriage: Consists of several parts that serves to support the cutting tool and control its action. Moved along bed ways.
5. Lathe Centre: Tapered components fit into spindles in headstock (live centre) and tailstock (dead centre).
6. Feed mechanism: Movement of tool relative to work piece. Longitudinal feed, cross feed, angular feed.

Lathe Operations:
Turning, Facing, Chamfering, Thread Cutting, Spinning, Grooving, Drilling, Parting-off, Boring, Knurling.

Drilling Operation:
- Operation of making holes in a workpiece by forcing a rotating tool called a drill against it.
- Drill is a multipoint cutting tool (cylindrical bar with helical grooves).
- Drilling Machine has drill chuck and key. Operations: Drilling, Boring, Reaming.
- Boring Operation: Enlarging an already existing hole by means of an adjustable single-point tool.
- Reaming Operation: Operation of finishing and sizing an already existing hole using a multiple cutting edges tool called reamer.

Milling Operation:
- Process of removal of metal by feeding the work piece against rotating multi-point cutter.
- Types of Milling: Plane Milling, Slot Milling, Gear Milling.
- Plane Milling: Production of flat surfaces with milling cutter axis parallel to the surface.
- Slot Milling: T-slot cutter is used. Plain slot is cut first using an end milling cutter.
- Gear Milling: Process by which gears are produced using gear cutters. Profile of the cutter corresponds to the tooth space of the gear.
