4 Vitamin-M

Reflect and Respond
I From your experience with an elderly person at home or in your neighbourhood, complete the following graphic organiser.
Why should we care for the elderly?
- What are the problems faced by the elderly?
- CARING FOR THE ELDERLY
- What could be the possible reasons for the problems faced?
- How can we take care of the elderly?
Now, discuss the points written in the organiser with your classmates and teacher.

II Fill in the table given below. You may check your answers with the help of a dictionary.
Word | Not heard this word before | Have heard this word but don't know what it means | I know this word. It has something to do with... | Write the meaning of this word
1. frail
2. shuddered
3. poky
4. forbid
5. pottering
6. winced

III Think of a tradition, story, or recipe passed down by grandparents or an elderly relative in your family. What does it mean to you? How does it connect you to your growing-up years? Share with your classmates and teacher.

Reading for Meaning
I
"I wish," said Ravi's mother, hurriedly putting some green, red and orange tablets on a saucer, "that somebody would invent a memory-Vitamin-M, they could call it, and we could give it to old people to help them improve their memories."
"Shh... Grandpa'll hear you," said Ravi, pointing to the frail old figure sitting in the rocking chair, holding the newspaper inches from his nose to read it.
"Don't worry, I doubt whether Grandpa can hear me. He doesn't hear too well, or see too well, or even remember too well these days. I'm glad that your holidays have started from today. Now you can look after him. Last month was..." she stopped and shuddered at the memory.
It was only last month that Ravi's Grandpa had come to live with them because he was getting too old to live on his own. It had been a difficult month with Grandpa having to be admitted to the hospital because he absent-mindedly took a double dose of his medicines, and then gave them several anxious moments when he got lost on one occasion he went for a walk and forgot the way back home.
Grandpa had got very upset when his daughter, Ravi's mother, insisted that he shouldn't go out alone again. "I'll have you know, Vidya, my dear," he had told his daughter with a trace of the firmness that had been a natural part of his job as a lawyer, "that I've been looking after myself for the better part of my seventy-five years. After your mother died ten years ago, I took over her duties as well and have been cooking, shopping and keeping house too. First you force me to come and live with you in this poky little flat, in this horrible, crowded city and then you think you have the right to forbid me to go out on my own!"
Grandpa hated the noise and bustle of city life and when they were on their own, he often spoke, longingly, of his small brick house in town. "Such a wonderful place...! With that big mango tree in the garden! It is so quiet that at dusk you can even hear a leaf fall!" But then Grandpa had slipped and fallen in the garden late one evening while he was pottering around and lain outside all night because there was no one at home to help him up. That was a month ago and it made Ravi's mother lock up the tiny brick house and bring Grandpa to live with them.
"Whatever happens, Ravi, you're not to let Grandpa go out on his own. It's too dangerous," she instructed, adding details of medicines to be given to Grandpa after lunch. Turning to her father she said, "I'm off to work, Papa, Ravi will be here to look after you. His holidays have begun from today."

Ravi winced at the over-loud tone his mother used when speaking to Grandpa, as though she were speaking to a child who couldn't hear or understand too well. Grandpa continued to rock gently and gave no sign that he had heard her at all.
"Don't worry, Mamma," Ravi promised, looking at his mother's anxious face. He felt sorry for her. "You go to work. Grandpa'll be fine at home with me."
"Shall we play chess or watch the cricket match on TV, Grandpa?" Ravi asked after his mother left. Grandpa played a great game of chess, very cool and cunning, and Ravi found that his own game had improved greatly ever since Grandpa had come to live with them. "That's the opening move Karpov made when he played against the computer," he would tell Ravi as he moved a piece, or, "You're making the same mistake that Bobby Fischer made in his historic match against Spassky."
"How can he remember all those thousands of chess games and still forget the names of people he meets often!" Ravi wondered.
"You set out the chessboard," said Grandpa, putting his paper down, "I'll just walk across to the corner shop to see if the Tamil newspaper has arrived."
"Papa usually buys you the Tamil paper on his way home! But if you want it immediately, I'll go now and buy it for you," Ravi offered.
"I hope you're not going to be as tiresome as your mother, Ravi. Treating me like a baby! Has she told you not to let me go out on my own? Told you to keep me a prisoner here, has she?" Grandpa looked suspicious at this thought.
Ravi felt guilty for a moment, then quickly recovered to say loyally, "Of course not, Grandpa. Mamma would never treat you like a baby ... or a prisoner."
"Good," said Grandpa craftily, "then you'll have no objection to my going out."

He picked up his beautiful shiny-black mahogany walking stick with a brass handle carved in the shape of an eagle's head, put on his bright-yellow cap and declared, "I'll be back home before you can set up the board, Ravi."
Off he went, twirling his walking stick jauntily, leaving Ravi in a dilemma. His grandfather would feel hurt if he insisted on accompanying him and his mother would be furious if she knew Ravi had let him go out on his own.
He heard the elevator door shut as Grandpa went down. Ravi decided he would follow Grandpa secretly, at a safe distance, to make sure he came to no harm.

Check Your Understanding
I Why did Grandpa dislike living in the city with his daughter?
II Why did Vidya not want her father to go out alone?
III Was Ravi in favour of his mother treating Grandpa like a child? How can you say so?
IV Would Ravi be able to keep up his promise to his mother?

II
Ravi ran out of the building just in time to see Grandpa's yellow cap disappearing round the corner. Grandpa's first stop was the children's park where he bought himself a paper-cone of peanuts and settled on a bench, watching the children play.
Ravi, feeling very foolish, had to crouch behind a bush trimmed in the shape of an elephant to avoid being seen. He felt even more foolish when a small child came up to him and asked, "Are you playing hide and seek? I can show you a better place to hide."
"Shhh, shhh," was all Ravi could say before he felt a shadow fall over him and a loud voice boomed, "How dare you shoo my child? Who are you?" It was the little boy's mother.
"Shhh, shhh," Ravi repeated to the lady.
"I'll shh you, you rude boy!" said the lady, picking up her umbrella threateningly. The ultimate humiliation was when Ravi had to crawl out of the park on all fours, ducking behind the benches, creeping behind the bushes, thanking his lucky stars that Grandpa hadn't heard the noise and spotted him.

Grandpa's next stop was the tea stall, and this time Ravi took position behind a big banyan tree to watch him, feeling most embarrassed when the vendors sitting under the tree gave him quizzical looks.
"This area is booked by us," said one lady who was selling plastic combs, in the same tone she might use were she asked to address a gathering without being given a loudspeaker, "There's no room for any new vendors."
"Shhh, Don't talk so loudly. Do I look as though I'm selling anything?" Ravi asked her.
"Who's talking loudly?" said the old lady, raising her voice just enough for Ravi to hear her, as though she was talking to him from across the city.
"Who are you accusing of talking loudly? ... and that too from behind the tree. Who are you hiding from?" another vendor selling ribbons and clips asked. She too was one of those lucky ones who would never ever require a megaphone.
"Are you talking about one of us?" asked another vendor. A group of them surrounded Ravi.
"Oh, all right!" Ravi conceded defeat and moved to duck behind a shiny silver car, peering through the windows to keep an eye on his grandfather. Grandpa took his time sipping a sugary cup of tea (he was forbidden sugar at home), then ate two bananas (another banned item), then tucked into an ice cream bought from the cart. (Mother would faint if she saw this!)
Ravi himself felt hot, bothered and close to fainting by the time Grandpa finished his snack. His heart thudded anxiously when he saw Grandpa zigzagging through the traffic as he crossed the road. He shut his eyes in panic when he heard the screech of brakes and opened them just in time to see Grandpa entering the barber shop.
Now Grandpa was as bald as a table tennis ball, so Ravi decided that a closer look was in order. He crossed the road, first looking dramatically left and then right and then hurriedly ducked into the shop next to the barber shop ... only to be evicted a moment later amidst a volley of feminine shrieks because it happened to be a Ladies' Hairdressing Salon.
"Just as well I was thrown out," thought Ravi because he spotted Grandpa making his way briskly towards the bus stop, and, oh no, boarding the first bus that stopped there.
Sprinting for the bus and jumping on to it seconds before it started would have deterred a lesser detective, but not Ravi, who was panting as he struggled for a place in the bus. He could see Grandpa's yellow cap somewhere in the front. It was warm inside the bus so Grandpa took off his cap to reveal ... a full head of grey hair! Ravi was startled. Surely Grandpa couldn't have bought a wig at the barber shop, he thought, pushing his way to the front of the bus to confront the cap-wearer. It was a total stranger! He was wearing a white pyjama and shirt, which was Grandpa's standard attire, and a yellow cap exactly like Grandpa's. But wait, the cap had a coffee-strain on its rim just like Grandpa's!
"Grandpa's cap!" Ravi couldn't help exclaiming. The stranger grinned pleasantly and told Ravi that a kind old gentleman in the barber shop had insisted that he take his cap because it was such a hot day. That was typical of Grandpa, always generous. But where was Grandpa?

Check Your Understanding
I Complete the flow chart by describing Grandpa's day out.
Grandpa goes out to get Tamil newspaper. -> Ravi follows Grandpa. -> Grandpa first stops at 1. _______ -> buys 2. _______ and watches _______.
Ravi gets scolded by 4. _______ and _______. <- Ravi hides behind a banyan tree and watches. <- Grandpa next goes to 3. _______. <- Ravi hides behind a bush to observe.
Grandpa drinks 5. _______ and eats _______. -> Grandpa then crosses the road and enters a 6. _______. -> Next Grandpa walks quickly to a 7. _______ and _______. -> Ravi enters the bus only to discover that he had been fooled.

II Was Grandpa lost as feared by Ravi's mother?
III How would Ravi feel after seeing Grandpa?
IV Do you think Ravi's mother will get to know about what had happened?

III
Ravi went back to the barber shop. Grandpa wasn't there. He wasn't at the park either. Ravi was frantic. After all, his mother had left him in charge of Grandpa. He tried calling first his mother and then his father from a telephone booth but both numbers were busy. Sick with worry, Ravi went home wondering whether Grandpa would be able to find his way back.
To his great delight and relief, the first thing he heard when he opened the front door was the gentle whirr of Grandpa snoring in his bedroom. He knelt down near the bed and put his cheek against the old man's face. Grandpa's wrinkled skin had more creases than lines on a map. Grandpa smelt of eucalyptus ointment and shaving cream. Ravi was suddenly overcome with affection for his grandfather and gave him a hug, but Grandpa only grunted in his sleep. He decided not to question Grandpa because then he would have to reveal that he had been following him.
"What did you both do today?" asked Ravi's mother when she got back from office.
"I had a quiet morning, but I don't know about Ravi. He just disappeared instead of staying at home to look after me like you told him to," answered Grandpa coolly, while Ravi just looked confused and embarrassed.
Grandpa had another surprise for Ravi. A gift-wrapped parcel!
"But, Papa, Ravi's birthday was three months ago. Have you forgotten?" exclaimed Ravi's mother, impatiently.
"No. But you know I always give a gift to every child in the house on my birthday. Have you forgotten?" countered Grandpa, very seriously. Ravi's mother flushed and darted a stricken look at the calendar on which she had, at the beginning of the year circled the date in red and written 'Papa's birthday'. There was a gift for her too, and for Ravi's father as well, for Grandpa still considered them his 'babies'.
Grandpa turned to Ravi's father who had just walked into the room, "My daughter needs some Vitamin-M, I think - for her memory." Ravi's mother flushed a darker shade of red and Ravi's father looked confused.
Ravi unwrapped his gift to find a thick, hardcover book, The Best Detective Stories. "Great stories, Ravi. You can pick up some really good tips on how to be a detective. How to avoid getting fooled when one is trailing a suspect, for instance," Grandpa said solemnly.
"I don't think he wants to be a detective, do you, Ravi?" asked his father looking even more confused.
"I haven't decided yet," answered Ravi, because he was too busy trying to decide whether the twinkle in Grandpa's eye was an innocent gleam or a mischievous one.

ASHA NEHEMIAH

Check Your Understanding
I Describe how Ravi's emotional reaction upon finding Grandpa safe at home reveals his feelings towards his grandfather.
II What might be the significance of Grandpa's habit of giving gifts to everyone on his birthday rather than receiving them?
III Why do you think Grandpa gave Ravi a detective story book as a gift? What might this suggest about Grandpa's awareness of Ravi's actions earlier in the day?

Critical Reflection
I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
1. Grandpa hated the noise and bustle of city life and when they were on their own, he often spoke longingly of his small brick house in town. "Such a wonderful place...! With that big mango tree in the garden! It is so quiet that at dusk you can even hear a leaf fall!" But then Grandpa had slipped and fallen in the garden late one evening while he was pottering around and lain outside all night because there was no one at home to help him up.
(i) Choose the emotion displayed by the Grandfather.
A. regretful
B. apologetic
C. nostalgic
D. wistful
(ii) Complete the following sentence with a reason.
Grandpa hated the busy and noisy city life because ________________.
(iii) Why did Grandpa come to the city despite his dislike for city life?
(iv) Choose an expression similar in meaning to, 'you can even hear a leaf fall'.
A. end of one's life
B. arrival of autumn
C. sign of good luck
D. pin drop silence
(v) State one advantage and one disadvantage of the Grandfather living in the house in town.

2. "I had a quiet morning, but I don't know about Ravi. He just disappeared instead of staying at home to look after me like you told him to," answered Grandpa coolly, while Ravi just looked confused and embarrassed.
Grandpa had another surprise for Ravi. A gift-wrapped parcel!
"But, Papa, Ravi's birthday was three months ago. Have you forgotten?" exclaimed Ravi's mother, impatiently.
(i) Choose the option that displays the tone of the Grandfather's response.
A. apologetic
B. hurtful
C. calm
D. puzzled
(ii) Why was Ravi confused and embarrassed?
(iii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
Ravi's mother was impatient because ________________.
(iv) State whether the following sentence is true or false.
Grandfather forgot that Ravi's birthday was three months ago.
(v) Why did Grandpa say he didn't know what kind of morning Ravi might have had?

II Answer the following questions.
1. Grandpa is portrayed as a person with failing memory in the beginning of the story. Give two evidences to disprove the statement.
2. Give two characteristic traits of each of the following characters.
(i) Grandfather
(ii) Ravi
(iii) Ravi's mother
3. Why was Ravi worried about what Grandfather had at the tea stall?
4. Do you think it was easy for Ravi to follow his Grandfather? If yes, why? If no, why not?
5. 'Ravi is a good detective'. Give one argument in favour of and against the given statement.
6. Was Grandfather aware that Ravi was following him? How do you know?
7. In your opinion, who needs Vitamin-M? And why?
8. Some people believe society shows bias based on age (being young or old). Give an example where you might have experienced or observed such discrimination, when opinions were disregarded because of age.

Vocabulary and Structures in Context
1 Classify the words given in the box on the next page into movement words in Column 1 and sound words in Column 2. One example has been done for you.

--- Supplementary Reading: The Lost Child ---

The Lost Child
It was the festival of spring. From the wintry shades of narrow lanes and alleys emerged a gaily clad humanity. Some walked, some rode on horses, others sat, being carried in bamboo and bullock carts. One little boy ran between his father's legs, brimming over with life and laughter.
"Come, child, come," called his parents, as he lagged behind, fascinated by the toys in the shops that lined the way.
He hurried towards his parents, his feet obedient to their call, his eyes still lingering on the receding toys. As he came to where they had stopped to wait for him, he could not suppress the desire of his heart, even though he well knew the old, cold stare of refusal in their eyes.
"I want that toy," he pleaded.
His father looked at him red-eyed, in his familiar tyrant's way. His mother, melted by the free spirit of the day was tender and, giving him her finger to hold, said, "Look, child, what is before you!" It was a flowering mustard-field, pale like melting gold as it swept across miles and miles of even land.

A group of dragon-flies were bustling about on their gaudy purple wings, intercepting the flight of a lone black bee or butterfly in search of sweetness from the flowers. The child followed them in the air with his gaze, till one of them would still its wings and rest, and he would try to catch it. But it would go fluttering, flapping, up into the air, when he had almost caught it in his hands. Then his mother gave a cautionary call: "Come, child, come, come on to the footpath."
He ran towards his parents gaily and walked abreast of them for a while, being, however, soon left behind, attracted by the little insects and worms along the footpath that were teeming out from their hiding places to enjoy the sunshine.
"Come, child, come!" his parents called from the shade of a grove where they had seated themselves on the edge of a well. He ran towards them.
A shower of young flowers fell upon the child as he entered the grove, and, forgetting his parents, he began to gather the raining petals in his hands. But lo! he heard the cooing of doves and ran towards his parents, shouting, "The dove! The dove!" The raining petals dropped from his forgotten hands.
"Come, child, come!" they called to the child, who had now gone running in wild capers round the banyan tree, and gathering him up they took the narrow, winding footpath which led to the fair through the mustard fields.
As they neared the village the child could see many other footpaths full of throngs, converging to the whirlpool of the fair, and felt at once repelled and fascinated by the confusion of the world he was entering.
A sweetmeat seller hawked, "gulab-jamun, rasagulla, burfi, jalebi," at the corner of the entrance and a crowd pressed round his counter at the foot of an architecture of many coloured sweets, decorated with leaves of silver and gold. The child stared open-eyed and his mouth watered for the burfi that was his favourite sweet. "I want that burfi," he slowly murmured. But he half knew as he begged that his plea would not be heeded because his parents would say he was greedy. So without waiting for an answer he moved on.
A flower-seller hawked, "A garland of gulmohur, a garland of gulmohur!" The child seemed irresistibly drawn. He went towards the basket where the flowers lay heaped and half murmured, "I want that garland." But he well knew his parents would refuse to buy him those flowers because they would say that they were cheap. So, without waiting for an answer, he moved on.
A man stood holding a pole with yellow, red, green and purple balloons flying from it. The child was simply carried away by the rainbow glory of their silken colours and he was filled with an overwhelming desire to possess them all. But he well knew his parents would never buy him the balloons because they would say he was too old to play with such toys. So he walked on farther.
A snake-charmer stood playing a flute to a snake which coiled itself in a basket, its head raised in a graceful bend like the neck of a swan, while the music stole into its invisible ears like the gentle rippling of an invisible waterfall. The child went towards the snake-charmer. But, knowing his parents had forbidden him to hear such coarse music as the snake-charmer played, he proceeded farther.
There was a roundabout in full swing. Men, women and children, carried away in a whirling motion, shrieked and cried with dizzy laughter. The child watched them intently and then he made a bold request: "I want to go on the roundabout, please, Father, Mother."
There was no reply. He turned to look at his parents. They were not there, ahead of him. He turned to look on either side. They were not there. He looked behind. There was no sign of them.
A full, deep cry rose within his dry throat and with a sudden jerk of his body he ran from where he stood, crying in real fear, "Mother, Father." Tears rolled down from his eyes, hot and fierce; his flushed face was convulsed with fear. Panic-stricken, he ran to one side first, then to the other, hither and thither in all directions, knowing not where to go. "Mother, Father," he wailed. His yellow turban came untied and his clothes became muddy.
Having run to and fro in a rage of running for a while, he stood defeated, his cries suppressed into sobs. At little distances on the green grass he could see, through his filmy eyes, men and women talking. He tried to look intently among the patches of bright yellow clothes, but there was no sign of his father and mother among these people, who seemed to laugh and talk just for the sake of laughing and talking.
He ran quickly again, this time to a shrine to which people seemed to be crowding. Every little inch of space here was congested with men, but he ran through people's legs, his little sob lingering: "Mother, Father!" Near the entrance to the temple, however, the crowd became very thick: men jostled each other, heavy men, with flashing, murderous eyes and hefty shoulders. The poor child struggled to thrust a way between their feet but, knocked to and fro by their brutal movements, he might have been trampled underfoot, had he not shrieked at the highest pitch of his voice, "Father, Mother!" A man in the surging crowd heard his cry and, stooping with great difficulty, lifted him up in his arms.
"How did you get here, child? Whose baby are you?" the man asked as he steered clear of the mass. The child wept more bitterly than ever now and only cried, "I want my mother, I want my father!"
The man tried to soothe him by taking him to the roundabout. "Will you have a ride on the horse?" he gently asked as he approached the ring. The child's throat tore into a thousand shrill sobs and he only shouted, "I want my mother, I want my father!"
The man headed towards the place where the snake-charmer still played on the flute to the swaying cobra. "Listen to that nice music, child!" he pleaded. But the child shut his ears with his fingers and shouted his double-pitched strain: "I want my mother, I want my father!"
The man took him near the balloons, thinking the bright colours of the balloons would distract the child's attention and quieten him. "Would you like a rainbow-coloured balloon?" he persuasively asked. The child turned his eyes from the flying balloons and just sobbed, "I want my mother, I want my father!"
The man, still trying to make the child happy, bore him to the gate where the flower-seller sat. "Look! Can you smell those nice flowers, child! Would you like a garland to put round your neck?"
The child turned his nose away from the basket and reiterated his sob, "I want my mother, I want my father!"
Thinking to humour his disconsolate charge by a gift of sweets, the man took him to the counter of the sweet shop. "What sweets would you like, child?" he asked. The child turned his face from the sweet shop and only sobbed, "I want my mother, I want my father!"
MULK RAJ ANAND
